In any blockchain platform,
from Bitcoin to Ethereum,
transactions hold a lot of vital information for the network to run.
We use block explorers to view the inputs and outputs in a Bitcoin transaction.
In addition to this information,
we also learn that transactions include small bits of instructions called scripts,
that allow the transaction to process.
In this section, we'll understand the purpose of scripts,
using Bitcoin scripts as an example.
Then, we'll discuss specifically unlocking and locking scripts,
checking out what's their purpose,
how do they work, and working to find them in raw transactions.
Now, let's start with scripts.
A script is just a list of instructions recorded in each transaction
that when executed will determine if the transaction
is valid and the Bitcoins can be spent.
Bitcoin scripts are written in a scripting language called Script,
and that's with a capital S. Quite a tongue twister,
so say that three times fast.
A scripting language is a simple lightweight language designed to be limited in scope,
and executable on a range of hardware.
Bitcoin script is a stack-based language,
this means that the data is stored in a simple data structure called a stack.
You can imagine it similar to a stack of playing cards.
The stack commonly stores numbers or data constants.
We interact with information in the stack using operators which shorthanded to opcodes.
Operators can push or add information onto the stack,
they can pop or remove information from it,
they can also act on information in the stack,
as well as push results back onto the stack.
When you see a script it will execute from left to right.
Now, that sums it up for Bitcoin script basics.
Now let's discuss the unlocking script and the locking script.
What are their purposes?
How do they work? Where can we find them in raw transactions?
As we've mentioned before,
inside a raw transaction we can find
the unlocking script and the locking script
inside the input and output information sections.
At a high level, the scripts are small programs
inside each transaction that are executed to decide which transaction is valid.
If the transaction is valid,
it can be signed, and a transaction can go through.
These two scripts work together,
similar to a puzzle edits solution.
For a transaction to be valid,
the unlocking script will solve the locking script.
Locking script is like a puzzle that specifies
the conditions that must be met before the Bitcoins can be spent.
The unlocking script contains the correct solution that
solves the puzzle and evaluates the locking script to ''true''.
Here's an example of Bitcoin script.
It's okay if these items don't make sense just yet,
we'll cover them later in more detail.
This is just for your reference for what scripts could look like.
Bitcoin clients validate transactions by checking that
the unlocking script solve the locking script. Here's how that works.
Remember that inputs from one transaction
refer back to the unspent outputs from another transaction.
For each transaction, the validation software
retrieves the UTXO referenced by each input.
Each UTXO has a locking script that contains conditions required to spend it.
In other words, each UTXO contains
a puzzle that needs to be solved in order for the input to be spent.
To check that the transaction is valid,
the validation software grabs the unlocking script contained in the input,
and checks if it solves the puzzle of the locking script.
Now, let me stop and call a common point of confusion.
Note that the unlocking script in a transaction does not unlock
or interact in any way with the locking scripts in that same transaction.
Instead, the unlocking script of an input interacts with
the locking script of an output from a previous transaction.
The locking script in the same transaction interacts
with the unlocking script of a future transaction.
Now, let's take a look at how the locking script itself works.
A locking script places a lock on an output by
specifying the conditions that must be met in order to spend the outputs in the future.
In a simple example, let's say my transaction output contains a script that says,
''This output is payable to whomever can present
a signature from the key corresponding to Brandy's public address.''
Since only Brandy has the wallet with the keys corresponding to that address,
only Brandy's wallet can present the signature in order to redeem this output.
In Bitcoin, historically the hash locking script
was saved in a variable called scriptPubKey,
because they contain a public key or a Bitcoin address.
So you might still see this phrase used in most Bitcoin app source code.
However, the phrase locking script is more
encompassing of the broader possibilities allowed in the scripting technology.
So, here's an example of scriptPubKey used in Bitcoin source codes, wallet.cpp file.
The unlocking script in our puzzle analogy is the solution that will solve the puzzle.
It satisfies the conditions of the locking script and allows the output to be spent.
A common way it is implemented is that the unlocking script contains
a digital signature produced by the users
wallet from their private key that will unlock the locking script.
Historically, the hash unlocking script is stored in
a variable called scriptSig because it usually contains a digital signature.
So you might see this phrase still used in most Bitcoin app source code.
However, the phrase unlocking script is used
because not all unlocking scripts must contain a signature.
Here's an example of it used in Bitcoin source codes wallet.cpp file.
Now that we know more about scripts,
where can we find this information in the transaction?
Let's go back to when we broke down the parts of a raw transaction,
and said that the scripts are found inside
the input information and output information sections.
If we rear organize those values into this table,
it's easier to see which parts are the script values.
You'll notice a lot of fields that we've discussed before like version,
input count, output count, and lock time.
Inside the input information we can see the field
scriptSig which we mentioned before is synonymous for unlocking script.
Inside the output information we see
the field scriptPubKey which is synonymous for the locking script.
You'll see these terms used when we look at
raw transactions from the debug console later.
So keep this in mind. I've added
this breakdown of the raw transaction down below this video.
Take some time to familiarize yourself with what sections they are.
This will help you when it comes to creating your own raw transaction.
In the next concept,
we'll be covering scripts in more technical detail.